Docs: adds intro to prometheus (#64352)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/fundamentals/intro-to-prometheus/index.md

---
aliases:
  - ../basics/timeseries/
description: Introduction to Prometheus
keywords:
  - grafana
  - intro
  - Prometheus
  - metrics
  - time series
title: What is Prometheus?
weight: 300
---

# What is Prometheus?

> Observability focuses on understanding the internal state of systems based on the data they produce, which helps determine if the infrastructure is operating as expected. Prometheus is a core technology for system observability. However, Prometheus can be a confusing term because it is used in different contexts. Understanding Prometheus basics, why it’s valuable, and how people use it in practice will help you use Grafana.

Reviewer: It wasn't contextually relevant in this paragraph, and as other comments allude to, getting into what metrics are creates the need to explain and outline the entire "taxonomy":  Telemetry = logs + metrics + traces.  There are additional complicated bits that we'd do well to avoid in this intro article, like how prometheus can do more than metrics.  That's a much more advanced topic which I think would confuse the discussion here.  How to get around all of this complexity without wrestling with it directly -- right up front in the first article -- is a real challenge.

It's like claiming that Newtonian physics is correct.  It *is*, but it isn't the whole story.  But if you're trying to teach newtonian physics, you really don't want to get into a discussion of quantum mechanics.

> Observability focuses on understanding the internal state of systems based on the data they produce, which helps determine if the infrastructure is operating as expected. Prometheus is a core technology for system observability. However, Prometheus can be a confusing term because it is used in different contexts. Understanding Prometheus basics, why it’s valuable, and how people use it in practice will help you use Grafana.

Author: Leaving that statement where it is.

> Observability focuses on understanding the internal state of your systems based on the data they produce, which helps determine if your infrastructure is healthy. Prometheus is a core technology for system observability, but the term "Prometheus" can be confusing because it is used in different contexts. Understanding Prometheus basics, why it’s valuable for system observability, and how people use it in practice will both help you better understand it and help you use Grafana.```

Author: ```suggestion
Observability focuses on understanding the internal state of your systems based on the data they produce, which helps determine if your infrastructure is healthy. Prometheus is a core technology for system observability, but the term "Prometheus" can be confusing because it is used in different contexts. Understanding Prometheus basics, why it’s valuable for system observability, and how people use it in practice will both help you better understand it and help you use Grafana.
```

> Prometheus was started in 2012 at SoundCloud, who found existing technologies such as Graphite insufficient for their observability needs. Prometheus has a robust data model and query language, both of which are addressed in the following sections, and is simple and scalable. In 2018, Prometheus graduated from Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) incubation, and today has a thriving community.

Author: I've asked @osg-grafana to weigh in and provide a few sentences or to pass along the name of someone. This is a great idea. Thank you.

## Prometheus as data

The following panel in a Grafana dashboard shows how much disk bandwidth on a Mac laptop is being used. The green line represents disk `reads`, and the yellow line represents `writes`.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/disk-io.png" max-width="750px" caption="Disk I/O dashboard" >}}

Data like these form _time series_. The X-axis is a moment in time, and the Y-axis is a number or measurement, for example, 5 megabytes per second. This kind of time series data appears everywhere in systems monitoring, but also in places like seasonal temperature charts and stock prices. This data is simply some measurement (such as the Tesla stock price, or Disk I/O) through a series of time instants.

> Prometheus is a technology used to collect and store time series data. Time series are fundamental to Prometheus; its [data model](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/) is arranged into:

Reviewer: We attempted to cover this much earlier in sections.  Does this get at it?

> Prometheus is a core technology for system observability. However, Prometheus can be a confusing term because it is used in different contexts. Understanding Prometheus basics, why it’s valuable, and how people use it in practice will help you use Grafana.

> Prometheus is a technology used to collect and store time series data. Time series are fundamental to Prometheus; its [data model](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/) is arranged into:

Author: I prefer how it reads now cause we're defining time series by using an example. then we can talk about prometheus and the data model.

- _metrics_ that consist of a _timestamp_ and a _sample_, which is the numeric value, such as how many disk bytes have been read or a stock price

> - a set of labels called _dimensions_

Reviewer: the examples of labels are "job" and "device" from the earlier PromQL example.

> - a set of labels called _dimensions_

Author: added.

You can store time series data in any relational database, but these kinds of systems are not developed to store and query large volumes of time series data. Prometheus and similar software provide tools to compact and optimize time series data.

### Example

> The following Grafana dashboard image shows a disk IO graph of raw data from Prometheus that is derived from a laptop.

Author: ```suggestion
The following Grafana dashboard image shows a Disk I/O graph of raw data from Prometheus derived from a laptop.
```

The **Metrics browser** field contains the following query:

> `node_disk_written_bytes_total{job=”integrations/macos-node”, device!=””}`

Reviewer: minor - note use of smart quotes ” here rather than regular " ascii.   This is I think a result of mis-pasting from gdocs.  Replace with regular "

> `node_disk_written_bytes_total{job=”integrations/macos-node”, device!=””}`

Author: ```suggestion
`node_disk_written_bytes_total{job="integrations/macos-node", device!=""}`
```

In this example, the Y-axis shows the total number of bytes written, and the X-axis shows dates and times. As the laptop runs, the number of bytes written increases over time. Below **Metrics browser** is a counter that counts the number of bytes written over time.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/dashboard-example.png" max-width="750px" caption="Metrics browser and counter" >}}

> The query is a simple example of [PromQL](/blog/2020/02/04/introduction-to-promql-the-prometheus-query-language/), the Prometheus Query Language. It identifies the metric of interest (`node_disk_written_bytes_total`) and provides two labels (`job` and `device`). The label selector `job=”integrations/macos-node”` is used to filter metrics. It reduces the scope of the metrics to those coming from the MacOS integration job, and specifies that the “device” label cannot be empty. The result of this query is the raw stream of numbers that the graph shows.

Reviewer: smart quotes

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/rate-function.png" max-width="750px" caption="Prometheus rate function" >}}

A counter metric is just one type of metric. Prometheus [supports several others](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/). A counter is a number (such as total bytes written) that only goes up. A second metric type is called a `gauge`, which can go up or down.

The following gauge visualization shows the total RAM usage on a computer.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/gauge-example.png" max-width="750px" caption="Gauge visualization" >}}

> The third metric type is called a `histogram`, which counts observations and puts them into configurable groups. The following example shows floating-point numbers grouped into ranges that show how often each occurred.

Reviewer 2: idk if it matters, but I think there is also the `summary` type of metric

Author: @moxious , would it make sense to add summary?

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/histogram-example.png" max-width="750px" caption="Historgram visualization" >}}

These core concepts of time series, metrics, labels, and aggregation functions are foundational to Grafana and observability.

## Why this is valuable

> Software and systems are a difficult business. Sometimes things go wrong. Observability helps you understand a system’s state so that future issues can be proactively addressed. And when problems do occur, you can diagnose and solve them within your Service Level Objectives (SLOs). The [three pillars of observability](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/distributed-systems-observability/9781492033431/ch04.html) are metrics, logs, and traces and Prometheus supports the metric pillar. When software on a computer runs slowly, observability can help identify whether the CPU is saturated, the system is out of memory, or if the disk is writing at maximum speed.

Reviewer: no change needed -- but ideally there would be a good reference link on our site to the 3 pillars of observability but there isn't yet a good fit.  Maybe a thing for another day.

## Prometheus as software

Prometheus isn’t just a data format; many people refer to it as an [open source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/). That’s because Prometheus is software, not just data.

Prometheus can scrape metric data from software and infrastructure and store it. Scraping means that Prometheus software periodically revisits the same endpoint to check for new data. Prometheus “scrapes” data from a piece of software that is instrumented with a client library.

For example, a NodeJS application can configure the [prom-client](https://github.com/siimon/prom-client) to expose metrics easily at an endpoint, and Prometheus can regularly scrape that endpoint. There are a number of other tools available within the Prometheus toolkit that you can use to instrument applications.

> ## Prometheus as deployment

Reviewer 2: we see to use _italics_ and "quotes" interchangeably for the same concepts here. "Prometheus as Data/Software" and _Promethtus as Data/Software_. I would suggest not using either and just capitalizing Data and Software, or just picking one formatting option

Author: Good call. thanks!

> ## Prometheus as deployment

Author: @GrafanaWriter , @Eve832 , @moxious  - I reworked this section a bit to smooth out the back and forth between metrics, telemetry, agent. Have a read, please. Thank you.

Reviewer 3: fab. This clarifies and works really well.

> The first section of this document introduced the _Prometheus as Data_ concept and how the Prometheus data model and metrics are organized. The second section introduced the concept of _Prometheus as Software_ that is used to collect, process, and store metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
The first section of this document introduced the Prometheus as Data concept and how the Prometheus data model and metrics are organized. The second section introduced the concept of Prometheus as Software that is used to collect, process, and store metrics.
```

> This section describes how “Prometheus as Data" and “Prometheus as Software” come together. Suppose an application called `MyApp` uses a Prometheus client to expose metrics. One approach to collecting metrics data is to use a URL in the application that points to an endpoint `http://localhost:3000/metrics` that produces Prometheus metrics data.

Reviewer: smart quotes

The following image shows the two metrics associated with the endpoint. The HELP text explains what the metric means, and the TYPE text indicates what kind of metric it is (in this case, a gauge). `MyAppnodejs_active_request_total` indicates the number of requests (in this case, `1`). `MyAppnodejs_heap_size_total_bytes` indicates the heap size reported in bytes. There are only two numbers because this data shows the value at the moment the data was fetched.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/endpoint-data.png" max-width="750px" caption="Endpoint example" >}}

These metrics are available in an HTTP endpoint, but how do they get to Grafana, and subsequently, into a dashboard?

> That’s where you can use either the Prometheus software, or the [Grafana Agent](/docs/agent/latest/). The Grafana Agent collects and forwards telemetry data to open sourcevdeployments of the Grafana Stack, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise, where your data can then be analyzed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use either the Prometheus software, or [Grafana Agent](/docs/agent/latest/) to scrape metrics. Grafana Agent collects and forwards telemetry data to open source deployments of the Grafana Stack, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise, where your data can then be analyzed.
```

Reviewer 2: I waffled with changing "Prometheus software" to "Prometheus remote write" because it's more accurate. Either way, we only talk about Agent here even though we indirectly mention the remote write (or `remote_write`) method. It might be worth addressing or mentioning and linking out to because a vast number of users go this route.

> Telemetry refers to the process of recording and transmitting the readings of an application or piece of infrastructure. Telemetry is critical to observability because it helps you understand exactly what's going on in your infrastructure. Telemetry data is a source of truth.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to tease this out a bit more - explain telemetry data in the context of metrics data. Because, as a beginner, it seems like we've switched our data focus, which is confusing.

Reviewer: Best suggestion I can make here to tie the two together is to add a sentence at the end:  "The metrics data that Prometheus helps us with is only one type of telemetry; the other two kinds are logs and traces, covered in separate articles."

Author: Done.

> Those metrics above, for example, `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total`, is telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure the Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every 5 seconds, and send the results to Grafana Cloud.

Reviewer 3: Now we're discussing Agent and how it can be configured, which is confusing as we were discussing Prometheus. I think we should expand this a bit to explain why we've switched to Agent (it seems like we're switching technologies to a beginner)

```suggestion
Those metrics in the example `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total` is telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure the Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every five seconds, and send the results to Grafana Cloud.
```

> Those metrics above, for example, `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total`, is telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure the Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every 5 seconds, and send the results to Grafana Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the metrics introduced previously, for example, `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total`, is telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every 5 seconds, and send the results to Grafana Cloud.
```

> Those metrics above, for example, `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total`, is telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure the Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every 5 seconds, and send the results to Grafana Cloud.

Reviewer: Sheesh, this is just complicated, I'm the author and I don't know the best way to explain this.  So let me break it down in the not simple way and then beg for help to explain it in the simple way.

OK so as discussed in the article, Prometheus can be used to collect & forward metrics to Grafana.  So _technically_ you don't need Grafana Agent at all!  But here's the thing:  grafana agent is engineered to be easier to use.  And *we* know stuff about their later learning journey (namely that later on we'll talk to them about logs and traces) that Prometheus doesn't easily do.   So we're setting them up for success and a smoother learning journey by introducing Grafana Agent now as the best way to do these things.  While they _could_ use Prometheus, if we didn't swtich topics, we'd make this text easier to follow now at the expense of a harder learning journey later.

We want to introduce grafana agent *now* because it uses Prometheus, and because it's a core bit of instrumentation for all types of observability, many of which _we aren't talking about in this article_.   That's the truth.  How best to write that in?  I need help.

> The following image illustrates how the Grafana Agent works as an intermediary between MyApp and Grafana Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following image illustrates how Grafana Agent works as an intermediary between MyApp and Grafana Cloud.
```

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/grafana-agent.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana Agent" >}}

## Bringing it together

> The combination of Prometheus and the Grafana Agent gives you incredible control over the metrics you want to report, where they come from, and where they’re going. Once the data is in Grafana, it can be stored in a Grafana Mimir database. Grafana dashboards consist of visualizations populated by data queried from the Prometheus data source. The PromQL query filters and aggregates the data to provide you the insight you need. With those steps, we’ve gone from raw numbers, generated by software, into Prometheus, delivered to Grafana, queried by PromQL, and visualized by Grafana.

Reviewer 3: ah ha. I think this needs to be stated earlier :)

> The combination of Prometheus and the Grafana Agent gives you incredible control over the metrics you want to report, where they come from, and where they’re going. Once the data is in Grafana, it can be stored in a Grafana Mimir database. Grafana dashboards consist of visualizations populated by data queried from the Prometheus data source. The PromQL query filters and aggregates the data to provide you the insight you need. With those steps, we’ve gone from raw numbers, generated by software, into Prometheus, delivered to Grafana, queried by PromQL, and visualized by Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The combination of Prometheus and Grafana Agent gives you control over the metrics you want to report, where they come from, and where they’re going. Once the data is in Grafana, it can be stored in a Grafana Mimir database. Grafana dashboards consist of visualizations populated by data queried from the Prometheus data source. The PromQL query filters and aggregates the data to provide you the insight you need. With those steps, we’ve gone from raw numbers, generated by software, into Prometheus, delivered to Grafana, queried by PromQL, and visualized by Grafana.
```

> ## What’s next?

Reviewer 3: Super section. Really useful.

> Now that you understand the basics of how Prometheus telemetry works, what will you build with it?

Reviewer 3: Let's make sure we're clear and specific with language - Prometheus telemetry here, but almost everywhere else it's been "metrics". Without context, this is confusing.

Reviewer: replace "telemetry" with "metrics" here

Author: Done.

## Prometheus as data

The following panel in a Grafana dashboard shows how much disk bandwidth on a Mac laptop is being used. The green line represents disk `reads`, and the yellow line represents `writes`.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/disk-io.png" max-width="750px" caption="Disk I/O dashboard" >}}

Data like these form _time series_. The X-axis is a moment in time and the Y-axis is a number or measurement; for example, 5 megabytes per second. This type of time series data appears everywhere in systems monitoring, as well as in places such as seasonal temperature charts and stock prices. This data is simply some measurement (such as a company stock price or Disk I/O) through a series of time instants.

Prometheus is a technology that collects and stores time series data. Time series are fundamental to Prometheus; its [data model](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/) is arranged into:

- _metrics_ that consist of a _timestamp_ and a _sample_, which is the numeric value, such as how many disk bytes have been read or a stock price

> - a set of labels called _dimensions_

Author: ```suggestion
- a set of labels called _dimensions_, for example, `job` and `device`
```

## Prometheus as software

Prometheus isn’t just a data format; it is also considered an [open source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/). That’s because Prometheus is software, not just data.

Prometheus can scrape metric data from software and infrastructure and store it. Scraping means that Prometheus software periodically revisits the same endpoint to check for new data. Prometheus “scrapes” data from a piece of software instrumented with a client library.

For example, a NodeJS application can configure the [prom-client](https://github.com/siimon/prom-client) to expose metrics easily at an endpoint, and Prometheus can regularly scrape that endpoint. Prometheus includes a number of other tools within the toolkit to instrument your applications.

## Prometheus as deployment

The first section of this document introduced the Prometheus as Data concept and how the Prometheus data model and metrics are organized. The second section introduced the concept of Prometheus as Software that is used to collect, process, and store metrics.

> This section describes how “Prometheus as Data" and “Prometheus as Software” come together. To explain this further, let's use an example. Suppose a 'MyApp' application uses a Prometheus client to expose metrics. One approach to collecting metrics data is to use a URL in the application that points to an endpoint `http://localhost:3000/metrics` that produces Prometheus metrics data.

Author: ```suggestion
This section describes how Prometheus as Data and Prometheus as Software come together. To explain this further, let's use an example. Suppose a 'MyApp' application uses a Prometheus client to expose metrics. One approach to collecting metrics data is to use a URL in the application that points to an endpoint `http://localhost:3000/metrics` that produces Prometheus metrics data.
```

The following image shows the two metrics associated with the endpoint. The HELP text explains what the metric means, and the TYPE text indicates what kind of metric it is (in this case, a gauge). `MyAppnodejs_active_request_total` indicates the number of requests (in this case, `1`). `MyAppnodejs_heap_size_total_bytes` indicates the heap size reported in bytes. There are only two numbers because this data shows the value at the moment the data was fetched.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/endpoint-data.png" max-width="750px" caption="Endpoint example" >}}

These metrics are available in an HTTP endpoint, but how do they get to Grafana, and subsequently, into a dashboard?

> That’s where you can use either the Prometheus software, or the [Grafana Agent](/docs/agent/latest/). The Grafana Agent collects and forwards telemetry data to open sourcevdeployments of the Grafana Stack, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise, where your data can then be analyzed.

Author: Comment from Fiona that I don't want to lose because I'm removing her suggestion:

I find it a bit confusing that we're discussing Prometheus, then we float the idea of using Agent, then discuss telemetry, then explain Agent again. Let me see if I can help a bit here.

> To get these metrics into Grafana, you can use either the Prometheus software or [Grafana Agent](/docs/agent/latest/) to scrape metrics. Grafana Agent collects and forwards telemetry data to open-source deployments of the Grafana Stack, Grafana Cloud, or Grafana Enterprise, where your data can be analyzed.

Author: Comment from Fiona that I wanted to preserve when I accepted a suggestion:

"I find it a bit confusing that we're discussing Prometheus, then we float the idea of using Agent, then discuss telemetry, then explain Agent again. Let me see if I can help a bit here."

Author: @GrafanaWriter, just checking. I've accepted your suggestion but copied the comment here to ensure you're satisfied. How does this look to you?

> Telemetry refers to the process of recording and transmitting the readings of an application or piece of infrastructure. Telemetry is critical to observability because it helps you understand exactly what's going on in your infrastructure. Telemetry data is a source of truth.

Author: ```suggestion
Telemetry refers to the process of recording and transmitting the readings of an application or piece of infrastructure. Telemetry is critical to observability because it helps you understand exactly what's going on in your infrastructure. Telemetry data is a source of truth. The metrics data that Prometheus helps us with is only one type of telemetry; the other two kinds of telemetry are logs and traces.
```

The metrics introduced previously, for example, `MyAppnodejs_active_requests_total`, are telemetry data. MyApp only makes it available for pull by means of an HTTP request. You can configure Grafana Agent to pull that data from MyApp every five seconds and send the results to Grafana Cloud.

The following image illustrates how Grafana Agent works as an intermediary between MyApp and Grafana Cloud.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/intro-prometheus/grafana-agent.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana Agent" >}}

## Bringing it together

The combination of Prometheus and Grafana Agent gives you control over the metrics you want to report, where they come from, and where they’re going. Once the data is in Grafana, it can be stored in a Grafana Mimir database. Grafana dashboards consist of visualizations populated by data queried from the Prometheus data source. The PromQL query filters and aggregates the data to provide you the insight you need. With those steps, we’ve gone from raw numbers, generated by software, into Prometheus, delivered to Grafana, queried by PromQL, and visualized by Grafana.

## What’s next?

> Now that you understand the basics of how Prometheus telemetry works, what will you build with it?

Author: ```suggestion
Now that you understand how Prometheus metrics work, what will you build?
```
